>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, DECEMBER 4: THE
INVESTIGATION AND RECOVERY
OPERATION CONTINUES FOLLOWING
THE DEADLY WAREHOUSE FIRE IN
OAKLAND.
AND CUBA BIDS FAREWELL TO FIDEL
CASTRO.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
OFFICIALS IN OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA
EARLIER TODAY SAID THE DEATH
TOLL FROM THIS WEEKEND'S TRAGIC
WAREHOUSE FIRE IS AT LEAST 30
PEOPLE, AND IS EXPECTED TO RISE
AS THEY FIND MORE VICTIMS.
SEVERAL DOZEN PEOPLE INITIALLY
REPORTED MISSING HAVE BEEN
REUNITED WITH THEIR FAMILIES,
BUT OFFICIALS ARE ASKING
RELATIVES OF THE MISSING TO SAVE
ITEMS THAT MIGHT HAVE D.N.A.
SAMPLES OF THEIR LOVED ONES.
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS ARE WORKING
IN 12-HOUR SHIFTS TO SIFT
THROUGH THE SITE WHERE A TWO-
STORY WAREHOUSE COLLAPSED AFTER
RAPIDLY IGNITING AND BURNING FOR
FIVE HOURS LATE FRIDAY NIGHT AND
EARLY SATURDAY MORNING.
FIREFIGHTERS AND OTHER
RESPONDERS HAVE SCOURED ONLY 20%
OF THE SITE, MOVING DEBRIS
BUCKET BY BUCKET.
>> THIS WILL BE A LONG AND
ARDUOUS PROCESS, BUT WE WANT TO
MAKE SURE WE'RE RESPECTING THE
VICTIMS, THEIR FAMILIES, AND OUR
FIREFIGHTERS' SAFETY.
>> Stewart: THAT PROCESS IS
EXPECTED TO TAKE SEVERAL MORE
DAYS, AS ARE THE OFFICIAL
NOTIFICATIONS TO FAMILIES.
>> WE ANTICIPATE THE THAT NUMBER
OF VICTIMS WILL RISE AND IT WILL
INCREASE.
IN REGARDS TO THE AMOUNT OF
PEOPLE THAT ARE STILL MISSING,
YES, IT'S A SIGNIFICANT NUMBER.
>> Stewart: JOSETTE MELCHOR IS A
COMMUNITY ORGANIZER AND DIGITAL
ART CURATOR WHO HAS SIX FRIENDS
ON THE "MISSING" LIST.
SHE HAD BEEN INSIDE THE
WAREHOUSE BEFORE AND WAS
CONCERNED IT WAS NOT SAFE.
>> IT WAS ENTIRELY MADE OF WOOD.
REUSED FURNITURE.
AND THE KEY THING THAT I THINK
EVERYONE IS THINKING ABOUT IS
JUST THE SENSE THAT YOU'VE GOT
WHEN YOU CLIMBED UP THIS LADDER,
OR THIS STAIRCASE.
THAT YOU JUST COULDN'T GET BACK
DOWN FAST.
THERE WAS NO WAY THAT WAS GOING
TO HAPPEN.
>> Stewart: SHE HOSTED A VIGIL
LAST NIGHT FOR FRIENDS IN THIS
CLOSE-KNIT COMMUNITY WAITING FOR
WORD FROM THE AUTHORITIES.
>> ARE WE'RE ALL REALIZING THAT
WE NEED TO REMEMBER PEOPLE'S
LIVES AND REMEMBER THE PEOPLE
SURROUNDING US AND REMEMBER THE
SMILES AND FACES THAT ARE
ALWAYS AROUND US IN THIS
COMMUNITY.
AND HOW MUCH WE CHERISH THEM.
>> Stewart: HER NONPROFIT
GROUP THE GRAY AREA FOUNDATION
FOR THE ARTS, STARTED A RELIEF
FUND THAT ROSE QUICKLY TO ITS
GOAL OF $150,000 DOLLARS.
>> IT'S INCREDIBLE TO SEE HOW
MANY PEOPLE ARE COMING OUT FROM
ALL OVER THE WORLD TO SUPPORT
SUCH A SMALL COMMUNITY.
>> Stewart: D.J. AUGIE SANCHEZ
HAS PERFORMED AT PARTIES LIKE
THE ELECTRONIC MUSIC EVENT THAT
WAS UNDERWAY AT THE WAREHOUSE
FRIDAY NIGHT WHEN THE FIRE BROKE
OUT.
TWO OF HIS FRIENDS WERE
PERFORMING THERE AT THE TIME.
>> AS PERFORMERS, WE KNOW THE
RISKS BECAUSE WE TAKE IN SOME OF
THESE SPACES.
IT DEFINITELY HITS HOME.
IT COULD HAVE BEEN ANY ONE OF US
THAT WAS AT AN EVENT LIKE THIS.
>> Stewart: DEVIN KATAYAMA OF
KQED NEWS IN SAN FRANCISCO HAS
BEEN COVERING THE STORY AND
JOINS ME NOW FROM OAKLAND.
FOR THE PEOPLE UNFAMILIAR WITH
THIS AREA THIS PART OF OAKLAND
CAN YOU DESCRIBE WHAT THE
COMMUNITY IS LIKE THERE?
>> SURE, I MEAN THE FRUITVALE
NEIGHBORHOOD IS REALLY CHERISHED
HERE IN OAKLAND.
IT IS A BIG LATINO NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S BEEN NEGLECTED BY A LOT OF
THE DEVELOPMENT THAT SOME OTHER
PARTS OF OAKLAND ARE SEEING,
PARTS OF OAKLAND BEING
GENTRIFIED.
FRUITVALE HAS NOT HIT THAT LEVEL
YET.
RIGHT ON INTERNATIONAL BOULEVARD
IS RIGHT WHERE THE BUILDING IS
OFF OF AND 31st AVENUE, AND SO
THERE IS CRIME IN THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD AS WELL.
THERE IS ALSO A LOT OF ARTISTS
WHO LIVE IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
BUT ALSO CONGREGATE OBVIOUSLY IN
WAREHOUSES LIKE YOU SAW OVER THE
PAST DAY AND A HALF.
IT'S A PART -- IT'S PARTLY
BECAUSE OF THE RENT IS CHEAPER
IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD AS WELL.
>> Stewart: THE BUILDING'S
BEEN THE FOCUS OF COMPLAINTS
RECENTLY, CAN YOU TELL US ABOUT
THAT?
>> SURE, I WANT TO SPEAK TO THAT
VERY CAREFULLY THIS IS SOMETHING
THEY HAVE BEEN INVESTIGATING BUT
RIGHT NOW THEY ARE FOCUSING ON
THE PEOPLE.
FROM WHAT WE UNDERSTAND THE
BUILDING WAS ABOUT AS A
ONE-STORY WAREHOUSE, NOT
PERMITTED FOR ENTERTAINMENT, NOT
PERMITTED FOR PEOPLE TO LIVE IN.
BOTH THINGS THAT HAVE REPORTEDLY
COME OUT THAT THIS WAREHOUSE WAS
BEING USED FOR.
OBVIOUSLY A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
LOOKING FOR SOMEBODY TO BLAME.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE WONDERING
WHO THESE OWNERS WERE AND WHO
WAS THROWING OFF THIS EVENT AND
WHY THERE WERE SO MANY PEOPLE IN
A BUILDING SUCH AS THIS BUILDING
FOR A PARTY.
NOW I THINK SOMETHING THAT'S
IMPORTANT TO KNOW ABOUT OAKLAND
IS THAT THESE KINDS OF SPACES
ARE ACTUALLY PART OF WHAT GIVES
OAKLAND ITS CHARACTER.
WHEN YOU SPEAK TO A LOT OF
PEOPLE THEY SPEAK TO THESE
WAREHOUSE PARTIES AND IT IS A
PART OF OAKLAND'S CULTURE.
SO THESE SPACES EXIST.
AND IN MANY WAYS THESE SPACES
ARE PLACES WHERE PEOPLE WHO YOU
KNOW FEEL LIKE THEY DON'T HAVE
ANY OTHER OUTLET MAY BE ABLE TO
GO TO TO BE ENTERTAINED, TO HAVE
PARTIES LIKE THIS.
CERTAINLY THERE ARE QUESTIONS
RAISED ABOUT HOW MANY OF THESE
SPACES EXIST AND HOW CLOSE OF AN
EYE THE CITY IS KEEPING ON THESE
SPACES.
AND THAT'S GOING TO BE COMING
OUT IN THE NEXT DAYS, MONTHS,
HOWEVER LONG IT TAKES.
>> Stewart: AND ALSO THE ISSUE
OF WHETHER THE PEOPLE ARE USING
THE SPACE FOR RESIDENCES OR
PLACES TO STAY FOR SHORT PERIODS
OF TIME RIGHT?
>> CERTAINLY WE HAVE HEARD
STORIES OF PEOPLE WHO MAY HAVE
BEEN HOMELESS WHO WERE SERVED BY
THIS COMMUNITY AS WELL.
YOU SPEAK TO -- YOU HEAR FROM A
LOT OF PEOPLE THAT THIS WAS BOTH
A BELOVED COMMUNITY, THIS GROUP
OF FOLKS WHO SPENT TIME IN THIS
BUILDING, THREW PARTIES IN THIS
BUILDING AND THEN YOU HEAR A LOT
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE REALLY ANGRY
AT THE PEOPLE WHO EITHER THROW
THESE PARTIES OR OWN THIS SPACE,
SAYING THAT THEY HAVE BEEN
WARNED BEFORE.
AGAIN THESE ARE ALL REPORTS SO I
CAN'T CONFIRM ANY OF THIS BUT I
THINK THAT'S WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
BE LOOKING FOR IN THE COMING
WEEKS.
>> Stewart: YES, STORY STILL
DEVELOPING.
DEVIN KATAYAMA, FROM KQED NEWS.
THANK YOU FOR SHARING YOUR
REPORTING.
>> Stewart: TODAY IN SANTIAGO,
CUBA, THE REMAINS OF FORMER
PRESIDENT FIDEL CASTRO, WHO DIED
TEN DAYS AGO, WERE INTERRED IN
WHAT THE GOVERNMENT CALLED A
SIMPLE CEREMONY.
NO OTHER MAN IN THE 20TH CENTURY
RULED HIS COUNTRY LONG AS HE
DID-- 49 YEARS, BEFORE HE
STEPPED DOWN IN 2008.
HIS SUPPORTERS SAW HIM AS A
BRAVE CHAMPION OF THE PEOPLE,
AND OPPONENTS SAW A RUTHLESS
DICTATOR.
WITH THE HELP OF THE PULITZER
CENTER FOR CRISIS REPORTING,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT NICK SCHIFRIN IS
IN CUBA OUTSIDE THE FUNERAL AND
JOINS US NOW FROM SANTIAGO.
NICK?
>> Reporter: ALLISON, GOOD
EVENING.
THIS IS THE CITY THAT BIRTHED
THE HERO'S MYTH OF CASTRO AS
REVOLUTIONARY, WHERE HE
DESCENDED FROM THE MOUNTAINS
BEHIND ME IN 1959 TO OVERTHROW A
CORRUPT, U.S.-BACKED DICTATOR.
HE DOMINATED CUBA FOR THE NEXT
HALF CENTURY WITH A COMBINED
CHARISMA AND CRUELTY, CONVINCING
HIS PEOPLE HE WAS THEIR DESTINED
SAVIOR REPRESSING THEM WITH ZERO
TOLERANCE FOR DISSENT.
BUT IN THIS CITY YOU HEAR NO
LOATHING-- ONLY LOVE.
>> Reporter: FIDEL CASTRO'S
FINAL JOURNEY ENDED IN THE CITY
WHERE HIS REVOLUTION BEGAN.
A MILITARY CONVOY PULLED A FLAG-
DRAPED, CEDAR COFFIN CONTAINING
HIS ASHES THROUGH SANTIAGO'S
STREETS.
HIS SUCCESSOR, AND 85-YEAR-OLD
YOUNGER BROTHER, RAUL, TOOK THAT
BOX AND PLACED IT INSIDE A
BOULDER-LIKE TOMB.
THE FINAL RESTING PLACE FOR THE
MAN WHO OUTLASTED TEN U.S.
PRESIDENTS, IS INSCRIBED ONLY
WITH HIS FIRST NAME THAT BECAME
SYNONYMOUS WITH HIS COUNTRY.
OUTSIDE THE CEMETERY, WITH THE
CUBAN FLAG AT HALF STAFF, 56-
YEAR-OLD ROGELIO DEL TORO VOWED
TO RUN THE 500-MILE ROUTE THAT
CASTRO'S REMAINS TOOK TO GET
HERE.
>> (translated): I WILL RUN
THIS ROUTE TO SHOW THE NEW
GENERATION THE PHYSICAL
RESILIENCE OF OUR COMMANDER IN
CHIEF AND WHAT THE CUBAN PEOPLE
ARE CAPABLE OF."
>> Reporter: DEL TORO'S SENSE OF
PATRIOTISM MEANS HE GLOSSES OVER
THE CASTRO'S ECONOMIC POLICIES,
WHICH PREVENTED HIM FROM
ESCAPING POVERTY.
>> (translated): HE IS THE
FATHER OF THE REVOLUTION, AND WE
WILL MOVE FORWARD WITH THE
TRADITIONS OF OUR COMMANDER.
>> Reporter: THAT ADULATION WAS
ALSO ON DISPLAY LAST NIGHT AT
REVOLUTIONARY SQUARE, FOR THE
FINAL PUBLIC FAREWELL TO THE MAN
THEY CALL THEIR ETERNAL
COMMANDER.
CUBAN PRESIDENT RAUL CASTRO HAS
PROMISED TO CONTINUE HIS OLDER
BROTHER'S WORK.
AND AMID THE FLYING FLAGS, WE
FOUND NO FIDEL CRITICS.
NO CRITICS OF THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT'S PERSECUTING ITS
ENEMIES OR CURTAILING FREEDOM OF
SPEECH.
NORAH BOSQUE IS 69-YEARS-OLD AND
HAS LIVED IN SANTIAGO ALL HER
LIFE.
>> (translated): THE PEOPLE
WHO DON'T AGREE WITH US CAN SAY
WHATEVER THEY WANT.
BUT FOR THOSE OF US WHO LOVE
HIM, HE WILL ALWAYS BE OUR
COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF.
>> Reporter: EVEN THE
GOVERNMENT'S OPPONENTS ADMIT
THESE SENTIMENTS ARE GENUINE.
DANIELA MORALES IS 16.
>> (translated): HE WILL
ALWAYS BE OUR COMMANDER EVEN IF
HE'S NOT HERE PHYSICALLY.
WE OWE HIM OUR FREEDOM AND
INDEPENDENCE.
>> Reporter: FOR HER, FREEDOM
AND INDEPENDENCE MEANS THE
STATE'S SAFETY NETS: FREE
EDUCATION FROM PRE-K THROUGH
UNIVERSITY, AND FREE HEALTH
CARE.
SHE WANTS TO BE AN ACTRESS.
>> (translated): OUR
GOVERNMENT, OUR STATE GUARANTEES
EVERYTHING WE NEED.
I THINK OUR SALARY IS ENOUGH TO
HAVE A STABLE AND COMFORTABLE
LIFE.
I WANT EVERYTHING TO STAY THE
WAY IT IS.
>> Reporter: BUT THE FACT IS,
DURING THE LAST DECADE
EVERYTHING IN CUBA HAS NOT
STAYED THE WAY IT WAS.
32-YEAR-OLD ANGEL GARCIA IS ONE
OF A HALF MILLION CUBANS WHO'S
BEEN ALLOWED TO ENTER THE
PRIVATE SECTOR.
HIS OLD GOVERNMENT JOB ONLY PAID
10 DOLLARS A WEEK.
HE QUIT AND NOW WORKS AT THIS
HIGH-END SALON, WHERE A SINGLE
HAIRCUT COSTS ABOUT THAT MUCH.
>> (translated): WE PREFER TO
WORK IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR NOW,
BECAUSE WE MAKE MUCH MORE MONEY
THAN IN ANY GOVERNMENT JOB.
>> Reporter: HE'S EAGER FOR MORE
OPPORTUNITY. AND HE THINKS THE
COUNTRY CAN PROVIDE THAT WITHOUT
CHALLENGING THE REVOLUTION'S
CORE PRINCIPLES.
>> (translated): WE HAVE
EDUCATION, WE HAVE FREE HEALTH
CARE.
OUR PROBLEMS ARE SMALL.
THAT ALLOWS US TO MOVE FORWARD
AND PUT OUR ENERGY TOWARD
FINDING THE RIGHT CHANGES.
GOING FORWARD, CUBA'S LEADERS
WILL HAVE TO FIGURE OUT A WAY TO
MAINTAIN THE SOCIALIST SAFETY
NET AND, AT THE SAME TIME, EASE
ECONOMIC FRUSTRATION.
IT'S NOT CLEAR IF THAT'S
POSSIBLE, BUT ALISON, WHAT THAT
LIKELY MEANS IS THAT CUBA WILL
EVOLVE-- BUT VERY, VERY SLOWLY,
AND WHILE IT MAINTAINS THE
REPRESSION THAT IS ONE OF
FIDEL'S MAIN LEGACIES.
>> Stewart: NICK, ONE OF
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S LEGACIES HAS
BEEN NORMALIZING RELATIONS.
WHAT ARE CUBANS SAYING ABOUT
THAT TREND CONTINUING UNDER
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP?
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT-ELECT
TRUMP COULD REVERSE PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S EXECUTIVE ACTIONS THAT
INCREASED TRAVEL AND BUSINESS
OPPORTUNITIES.
THAT'S WHAT TRUMP SEEMED TO
THREATEN IN A RECENT TWEET,
VOWING TO QUOTE TERMINATE THE
AGREEMENTS UNLESS CUBA MADE A
BETTER DEAL FOR THE CUBAN
PEOPLE.
RAUL CASTRO HAS BEEN ALLOWING
SLOW, MODEST OPENINGS HERE,
INCLUDING THOSE PRIVATE SECTOR
JOBS.
AND MOST ANALYSTS HERE AND IN
THE U.S. WARN THAT HALTING THE
NORMALIZATION COULD LEAD TO MORE
CRACKDOWNS, AND FEWER OPENINGS.
>> Stewart: NICK SCHIFRIN
REPORTING FROM SANTIAGO, CUBA.
THANK YOU.
>> Reporter: THANKS, ALISON.
>> Stewart: PROTESTORS OF AN
OIL PIPELINE IN NORTH DAKOTA
HAVE ACHIEVED A TEMPORARY
VICTORY.
THE STANDING ROCK SIOUX TRIBE
AND THE FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF
INTERIOR HAVE ANNOUNCED THE U.S.
ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS IS
HALTING CONSTRUCTION OF THE
1,200-MILE PIPELINE.
THE ARMY CORPS WON'T GRANT AN
EASEMENT TO ALLOW A SEGMENT TO
BE BUILT UNDER A LAKE UNTIL THE
COMPLETION OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT AGREEMENT.
LEAVING THE SITE WHERE THEY HAVE
BEEN CAMPED OUT FOR WEEKS.
KEY FIGURES IN THE INCOMING
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION ARE
DEFENDING THE PRESIDENT-
ELECT'S DECISION TO TAKE A PHONE
CALL FRIDAY FROM THE PRESIDENT
OF TAIWAN, WHICH PROMPTED A
DIPLOMATIC PROTEST FROM CHINA.
VICE-PRESIDENT ELECT MIKE PENCE
SAID TODAY THE TAIWANESE LEADER
WAS SIMPLY MAKING A "COURTESY
CALL," AND IT DID NOT INDICATE
ANY SHIFT IN AMERICA'S "ONE
CHINA" POLICY.
THE U.S. BROKE OFF DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS WITH TAIWAN IN 1979
AFTER RECOGNIZING THE BEIJING
GOVERNMENT.
INCOMING WHITE HOUSE CHIEF OF
STAFF REINCE PRIEBUS SAID TODAY
MR. TRUMP HAD ALREADY TALKED TO
CHINESE PRESIDENT XI AND
DESCRIBED THE TAIWAN CALL AS
PRAGMATIC.
>> LOOK, WE'VE GOT A LOT OF
PROBLEMS TO SOLVE IN THIS
COUNTRY, AND WE'RE NOT GOING TO
SOLVE THEM BY JUST, YOU KNOW,
MAKING BELIEVE THAT PEOPLE DON'T
EXIST.
THIS WAS A TWO-MINUTE
CONGRATULATORY CALL.
>> Stewart: GREEN PARTY
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE JILL
STEIN WILL ASK A FEDERAL COURT
TOMORROW TO ISSUE AN EMERGENCY
ORDER REQUIRING PENNSYLVANIA TO
CARRY OUT A RECOUNT OF LAST
MONTH'S PRESIDENTIAL VOTE.
STEIN DROPPED HER STATE COURT
PETITION AFTER THE JUDGE ORDERED
HER CAMPAIGN TO POST A MILLION
DOLLAR BOND TO COVER THE COSTS.
STEIN SAYS SHE CAN'T AFFORD
THAT.
TODAY SHE DEFENDED HER RIGHT TO
PURSUE RECOUNTS IN PENNSYLVANIA,
AS WELL AS IN WISCONSIN AND
MICHIGAN, THREE STATES WHERE
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP NARROWLY
BEAT HILLARY CLINTON.
THE RIGHT-WING POPULIST WAVE IN
EUROPE TOOK A STEP BACK TODAY.
IN AUSTRIA NORBERT HOFER OF THE
ANTI-IMMIGRATION FREEDOM PARTY
LOST THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
RUN-OFF TO LEFT-LEANING, FORMER
GREEN PARTY LEADER ALEXANDER VAN
DER BELLEN, WHO IS PRO-EUROPEAN
UNION.
>>SEE MORE IMAGES FROM FIDEL
CASTRO'S FUNERAL PROCESSION AT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
>> Stewart: ALTHOUGH RAPE HAS
BEEN CONSIDERED A WAR CRIME
SINCE THE END OF WORLD WAR I, A
NEW DOCUMENTARY TAKES AN IN-
DEPTH LOOK AT THE DIFFICULTIES
OF PROSECUTING MASS RAPE IN
INTERNATIONAL COURTS.
THE FILM, CALLED "THE
UNCONDEMNED," REVIEWS THE
LANDMARK CASE ABOUT RWANDA THAT
CHANGED HOW MASS RAPE COULD BE
PROSECUTED AS AN ACT OF
GENOCIDE.
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S" IVETTE
FELICIANO HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: IN THE SPRING AND
SUMMER OF 1994, AN ETHNIC
CLEANSING CAMPAIGN IN RWANDA
LEFT 800-THOUSAND PEOPLE DEAD,
EVEN WHILE UNITED NATIONS
PEACEKEEPERS WERE ON THE GROUND
AND THE REST OF THE WORLD DID
VIRTUALLY NOTHING TO STOP IT.
TOWARD THE END OF A CIVIL WAR,
RWANDA'S GOVERNMENT, THEN RUN BY
ITS ETHNIC MAJORITY, THE HUTUS,
SYSTEMATICALLY MURDERED 70% OF
THE COUNTRY'S ETHNIC MINORITY,
THE TUTSIS.
AS THE TOLL OF THE CARNAGE
BECAME CLEAR, HUMAN RIGHTS
GROUPS SUCCESSFULLY PRESSURED
THE UNITED NATIONS TO CONVENE
THE FIRST EVER INTERNATIONAL
TRIBUNAL FOR GENOCIDE IN
HISTORY.
BETWEEN 1998 AND 2012, THE
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL
FOR RWANDA CONVICTED 62
INDIVIDUALS FOR THE GENOCIDE AND
OTHER SERIOUS WAR CRIMES.
PART OF THE STORY RARELY TOLD
INVOLVES THE BRUTAL MASS RAPES
OF AN ESTIMATED 250-THOUSAND
WOMEN, MEN AND CHILDREN DURING
THE GENOCIDE AND THE WORLD'S
FIRST PROSECUTION OF RAPE AS A
WAR CRIME.
A NEW DOCUMENTARY, "THE
UNCONDEMNED," SHEDS LIGHT ON
THIS ATROCITY AND THE STRUGGLE
TO BRING JUSTICE FOR THE RAPE
SURVIVORS
JOURNALIST MICHELE MITCHELL
DIRECTED "THE UNCONDEMNED,"
WHICH REFERS TO THE PERPETRATORS
OF MASS RAPE NOT HELD
ACCOUNTABLE UNTIL THE LANDMARK
PROSECUTION.
THE FILM REVISITS THE EVENTS AND
THE CASE THAT WOULD CHANGE
INTERNATIONAL LAW.
WHY IS THIS AN IMPORTANT STORY
TO TELL TODAY IN 2016?
>> RAPE HAS BEEN A CRIME OF WAR
SINCE 1919.
BUT IT TOOK ALMOST 80 YEARS FOR
RAPE TO BE PROSECUTED FOR THE
FIRST TIME.
AND THE REASONS WHY THEY FINALLY
PROSECUTED CONTINUE ON TO THIS
DAY.
AND THOSE INCLUDE IT HAPPENS IN
EVERY CONFLICT AROUND THE WORLD,
WITH ALL RELIGIONS, AND IT'S
ALMOST NEVER TAKEN AS SERIOUSLY
AS OTHER CRIMES OF WAR.
>> Reporter: IT'S A VITAL STORY
NOW BECAUSE AS WE ARE SITTING
HERE AND TALKING, WE KNOW THAT
IT'S GOING ON IN SYRIA, IN IRAQ,
BY ISIS.
WE KNOW THAT BOKO HARAM IS DOING
IT.
SOUTH SUDAN, I COULD NAME ANY
NUMBER OF PLACES WHERE THIS IS
HAPPENING AS WE'RE HAVING THIS
CONVERSATION.
>> Reporter: ARE THERE
COMPLEXITIES ABOUT SEXUAL
VIOLENCE IN TIMES OF WAR THAT
YOU THINK ARE OFTEN
MISUNDERSTOOD?
>> ONE THING THAT I HAVE
CONSISTENTLY HEARD OVER THE LAST
THREE YEARS AS WE WERE MAKING
THIS FILM IS THAT, ' OH, WELL,
RAPE IS JUST SOMETHING THAT
HAPPENS IN WAR; IT'S ALWAYS
HAPPENED.
THE ACT OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE WILL
RIP APART A FAMILY AND A
COMMUNITY, AND BY VIRTUE OF
THAT, A SOCIETY, FOR SEVERAL
GENERATIONS.
AND IT'S NOT JUST THE SHAME THAT
HAPPENS.
A LOT OF TIMES YOU ARE
PHYSICALLY INCAPACITATED AFTER
THAT INCREDIBLY VIOLENT ACT.
>> Reporter: "THE UNDOCUMENTED"
FOCUSES ON THE CASE BROUGHT
AGAINST A MAYOR JEAN-PAUL
AKAYESU, WHO WAS CHARGED WITH
GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY FOR ORDERING MASS
MURDERS AND RAPES THAT OCCURRED
IN HIS TOWNSHIP, TABA.
MITCHELL INTERVIEWED RAPE
SURVIVORS AS WELL AS THE
PROSECUTORS AND AID WORKERS WHO
TOOK UP THEIR CAUSE.
>> THEY WOULD SAY, "WE BEGGED TO
BE KILLED AFTER THE RAPES," YOU
KNOW, "PLEASE KILL US."
A LOT OF THE HUTU MILITIAS WOULD
SAY, "NO, WE ARE GOING TO LEAVE
YOU ALIVE SO THAT YOU WILL DIE
OF SADNESS," AND THAT'S WITH
THESE WOMEN SAID: "WE ARE DYING
OF SADNESS."
>> Reporter: AN AMERICAN-LED
LEGAL TEAM CONVINCED A PANEL OF
U.N. JUDGES THAT AKAYESU HAD
USED MASS RAPE AS A FORM OF
TORTURE.
PIERRE PROSPER, THEN A LOS
ANGELES ASSISTANT DISTRICT
ATTORNEY, WAS ONE OF THE
PROSECUTORS.
CAN YOU TALK ABOUT THAT MOMENT
WHEN YOU REALIZED THAT
PROSECUTING RAPE WAS ESSENTIAL
TO AKAYESU'S CASE?
>> IT REALLY BECAME CRITICAL FOR
US IN THE AKAYESU CASE WHEN ONE
WITNESS TOLD US ABOUT AN EVENT
WHERE WOMEN WERE BEING TAKEN
BACK TO THE BACK OF THE CITY
HALL, AND SYSTEMICALLY
DISTRIBUTED AND VIOLATED, AND
THAT AKAYESU WAS THERE.
IT BECAME CLEAR TO US THAT THIS
WAS REALLY PART OF THE SCHEME,
PART OF THE GENOCIDE, PART OF
THE TORTURE, PART OF THE
DESTRUCTION OF THE FABRIC OF THE
SOCIETY.
SO IT WAS A DESIGNED PLAN TO
DIMINISH A POPULATION.
>> Reporter: WITH NO LEGAL
PRECEDENTS, THE UNDER-RESOURCED
AND UNDER-FUNDED LEGAL TEAM HAD
THE DIFFICULT JOB OF MAKING THE
CASE THAT MASS RAPES ARE JUST AS
DETRIMENTAL AS MURDERS DURING
GENOCIDE.
ONCE THE TRIAL BEGAN IN 1997,
THERE WERE HIGH EXPECTATIONS.
>> WE HAD THE PRESSURE COMING
OUT OF THE WEST, WHETHER IT BE
NEW YORK, THE UNITED NATIONS, OR
WESTERN GOVERNMENTS LOOKING AT
US AND SAYING ARE YOU GOING TO
WIN?
BECAUSE THEY NEEDED US TO WIN IN
ORDER TO SEND A MESSAGE TO THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY THAT
THERE WILL BE ACCOUNTABILITY FOR
GENOCIDE.
>> Reporter: AS THE FILM
RECOUNTS, PROSPER AND THE LEGAL
TEAM CONVINCED THREE RWANDAN
SURVIVORS TO STEP FORWARD AND
TESTIFY AGAINST AKAYESU IN
COURT, SHARING THAT MANY WOMEN
IN THEIR TOWN WERE FORCED TO
ENDURE MULTIPLE ACTS OF SEXUAL
VIOLENCE COMMISSIONED BY HIM.
>> I REMEMBER PUTTING WITNESSES
ON THE STAND, AND YOU LEAVE AT
THE END OF THE DAY JUST
EMOTIONALLY DRAINED, AND YOU SAY
TO YOURSELF "I HAVE JUST NOW
HEARD THE WORST THAT I'VE EVER
HEARD IN MY LIFE."
THE NEXT DAY, THE NEXT WITNESS
COMES ON, AND THEN YOU SAY "NO,
NO, TODAY IS THE WORST," AND IT
WAS LIKE THAT THROUGHOUT THE
ENTIRE PROCESS.
>> Reporter: HOW DID AKAYESU'S
CONVICTION AND THE CONCEPT OF
RAPE AS A WAR CRIME, HOW DID IT
CHANGE THE GAME?
>> IT DID A COUPLE OF VERY
IMPORTANT THINGS.
IT SET THE PRECEDENT.
THE WHOLE REASON WHY WE CAN
PROSECUTE RAPE AS A CRIME
AGAINST HUMANITY, CRIME OF WAR
AND A CRIME OF GENOCIDE IS
BECAUSE OF THE AKAYESU VERDICT.
AND THE OTHER THING IT DID,
WHICH WAS REALLY INTERESTING, IS
THAT IT TOOK GENDER OUT OF IT.
AND THAT'S INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT,
BECAUSE MEN ARE RAPED IN
CONFLICT AS WELL.
>> Reporter: AFTER A 20 MONTH
TRIAL IN ARUSHA TANZANIA, THE
RWANDA WAR CRIMES TRIBUNAL
SENTENCED AKAYESU TO LIFE IN
PRISON.
IN THE YEARS AFTER HIS
PRECEDENT-SETTING CASE,
INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNALS SHOWED
GREATER RESOLVE IN RECOGNIZING
WARTIME RAPES, SUCH AS IN THE
TRIBUNALS THAT HELD SERBS
ACCOUNTABLE FOR THEIR TREATMENT
OF BOSNIANS IN THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA.
MORE RECENTLY, CRIMES OF MASS
RAPE WERE PROSECUTED BY
TRIBUNALS FOLLOWING ATROCITIES
IN SIERRA LEONE AND IN THE
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO.
BUT PROSPER BELIEVES EVEN TODAY,
THE GLOBAL COMMUNITY COULD BE
MORE RESPONSIVE IN CONFLICTS
LIKE SOUTH SUDAN.
>> I THINK WE'VE LOST A BIT OF
OUR FOOTING, AND I ACTUALLY
THINK THAT WHAT HAPPENED IS ONCE
THE PERMANENT INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT WAS CREATED,
PEOPLE LOOKED AT THAT AS, "OH,
WE'VE ARRIVED."
AND THE POLITICIANS AROUND THE
WORLD SAID, ' WE'VE DONE OUR
JOB,
THERE'S THIS COURT, WE NEED NOW
FOCUS ON THESE ISSUES.'
IT CREATES THIS GAP, A GAP OF
INACTION.
SO I THINK THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY NEEDS TO WAKE UP,
GOVERNMENTS NEED TO WAKE UP, AND
REALIZE THAT THEIR
RESPONSIBILITY CONTINUES.
>> Reporter: A RESPONSIBILITY
THAT INTERNATIONAL REPORTING
KEEPS IN THE SPOTLIGHT.
>> BECAUSE THE MEN AND WOMEN OF
THE PRESS CORPS WHO COVERED WHAT
HAPPENED IN BOSNIA AND ALSO
RWANDA AND COVERED THE SEXUAL
VIOLENCE AND WROTE ABOUT IT AND
PUT IT ON TELEVISION AND KEPT IT
IN THE PUBLIC EYE, THAT CREATED
INTEREST ON THE PART OF THE
PUBLIC, WHO THEN WROTE LETTERS
TO THE TRIBUNALS SAYING, "WE
WANT YOU TO PROSECUTE THIS.
WE'RE GOING TO BE WATCHING."
IT GOES ALL THE WAY AROUND TO
THE FACT THAT THE PUBLIC GOT
INVOLVED AND DEMANDED THAT THEIR
LEADERS TAKE THIS SERIOUSLY, DO
SOMETHING.
SO IF IT WORKED THEN, IT CAN
WORK NOW.
>> THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NewsHOUR WEEKEND, I'M
ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.